Improve matter documentation (#27136)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/matter.markdown

ha_integration_type: integration
---

> The Matter integration allows you to control Matter devices on your local WiFi or {% term thread %} network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Matter integration allows you to control Matter devices on your local Wi-Fi or {% term thread %} network.
```

> The Matter integration allows you to control Matter devices on your local Wi-Fi or {% term thread %} network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Matter integration allows you to control Matter devices on your local Wi-Fi or {% term Thread %} network.
```

Author: I believe this is on purpose lower cased (not sure) ?

Reviewer: The `term` plugin is case-insensitive, so it doesn't matter.

The suggestion is correct and works.

> <p class='note'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class='note warning'>
```

Both the Matter standard itself and its implementation within Home Assistant are in a early stage, you may run into compatibility and/or early adopter problems, hence our mark of the integration as BETA.

> </p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</div>
```

> Both the Matter standard itself and its implementation within Home Assistant are in a early stage, you may run into compatibility and/or early adopter problems, hence our mark of the integration as BETA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The integration is marked BETA: Both the Matter standard itself and its implementation within Home Assistant are in a early stage. You may run into compatibility issues and/or other bugs.
```

Author: @c0ffeeca7 we've been going back and forth with this text so what should we do here ?

Reviewer 3: I think the proposed change from @agners  is clearer than the current version.

> # What is Matter ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# What is Matter?
```

> Matter is [the new standard for home automation](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matter_(standard)>) which has been released recently. It is in the process of being adopted by the tech industry. Matter is a local protocol. Device control is done without the need of any cloud. From a technical perspective, you can use a Matter compatible device with Home Assistant without having to connect to a vendor specific cloud. However, some vendors may require you to set up an account before you can enable Matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matter is [the new standard for home automation](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matter_(standard)>), which has been released recently. It is in the process of being adopted by the tech industry. Matter is a local protocol. Device control is done without the need of any cloud. From a technical perspective, you can use a Matter-compatible device with Home Assistant without connecting to a vendor-specific cloud. However, some vendors may require you to set up an account before you can enable Matter.
```

> Unlike the radio based protocols we're already familiar with in the IoT landscape, like Zigbee and Z-Wave, Matter makes use of standard IP-based communication. Matter is not a radio protocol, but a control protocol that runs on top of the existing network infrastructure, using your existing Wi-Fi/Ethernet routers and Thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the radio based protocols we're already familiar with in the IoT landscape, like Zigbee and Z-Wave, Matter uses standard IP-based communication. Matter is not a radio protocol, but a control protocol that runs on top of the existing network infrastructure, using your existing Wi-Fi/Ethernet routers and Thread.
```

> Home Assistant is a so called _controller_, it can control Matter based devices. Other examples of Matter controllers are the Google Nest speakers, Apple HomePods, and a SmartThings Station.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Home Assistant is a so-called _controller_, it can control Matter based devices. Other examples of Matter controllers are the Google Nest speakers, Apple HomePods, and a SmartThings Station.
```

## Bridge devices

> One of the great things about Matter is that you can have both Wi-Fi and Thread based devices on the same controller.
> Next to actual devices (e.g. actors or sensors), you will also see bridges. The bridge itself is connected to the network over Ethernet or Wi-Fi and bridges multiple devices into a Matter network. A great example of this is the Philips Hue V2 bridge which is a Zigbee hub but also a Matter bridge. This bridge exposes all Zigbee devices that are already connected to the bridge as Matter devices on the network. Also Aqara, SwitchBot, and IKEA have launched such Hub devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the great things about Matter is that you can have both Wi-Fi and Thread based devices on the same controller.
Next to actual devices (like actors or sensors), you will also see bridges. The bridge connects the network over Ethernet or Wi-Fi and bridges multiple devices into a Matter network. A great example is the Philips Hue V2 bridge, which is a Zigbee hub and a Matter bridge. This bridge exposes all Zigbee devices already connected to the bridge as Matter devices on the network. Also, Aqara, SwitchBot, and IKEA have launched such Hub devices.
```

> <p class='note'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class='note'>
```

Home Assistant, as a Matter controller, only supports **control** of Matter devices. Home Assistant is not a bridge itself and it cannot turn existing devices within Home Assistant into Matter compatible devices.

> </p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</div>
```

## Thread

Matter goes hand-in-hand with (but is not the same as) [Thread](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(network_protocol)>), which is a low power Radio mesh networking techology. Much like Zigbee, but with the key difference that it is _IP-addressable_, making it the perfect companion transport for Matter.

> Thread devices become directly addressable by Matter controllers (such as Home Assistant) thanks to the use of so called Thread Border Routers, which are in fact just devices that are both within your network and have a Thread chip builtin and thus act as a "router" between the Thread radio signal and your local network. These border routers (you will probably end up having multiple of them in your house) make sure that your Thread based devices are reachable on your regular network and thus can be controlled with Matter. Examples of Thread Borders routers are the Apple TV 4K, HomePod (gen 2 or Mini) and the Google Nest Hub V2, so devices that you may already own. Besides that, all kind of other border routers are available, built-in to hardware applicances or software solutions based on OpenThread Border Router, such as the add-on we provide to use with the built-in Zigbee/Thread chip of the [Home Assistant Yellow](/yellow/) or the [Home Assistant SkyConnect](/skyconnect/) dongle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thread devices become directly addressable by Matter controllers (such as Home Assistant) thanks to the use of so-called Thread Border Routers, which are in fact just devices that are both within your network and have a Thread chip builtin and thus act as a "router" between the Thread radio signal and your local network. These border routers (you will probably end up having multiple of them in your house) make sure that your Thread-based devices are reachable on your regular network and thus can be controlled with Matter. Examples of Thread Borders routers are the Apple TV 4K, HomePod (gen 2 or Mini), and the Google Nest Hub V2, so devices that you may already own. Besides that, all kind of other border routers are available, built-in to hardware appliances or software solutions based on OpenThread Border Router, such as the add-on we provide to use with the built-in Zigbee/Thread chip of the [Home Assistant Yellow](/yellow/) or the [Home Assistant SkyConnect](/skyconnect/) dongle.
```

> ## Thread

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Matter over Thread
```

Author: Can we leave it like this to draw attention to Thread ?

Reviewer 3: If I understood correctly we should use `{% term Thread %}` instead of just `Thread`, am I correct  ?
Also I agree with @agners  about the phrasing, it is clearer for the reader what roles play Thread vs Matter when it's explicitly mentioned.

Author: I don't agree, except when Thread stands out as a world on its own, like you are proposing, in that case it is perfect.
But... I have no idea if we may use that tooltip inside a header.

Reviewer: @Vinalti  Headers may be linkable. We should not add terminology pop-ups to that.

Author: going to leave it as-is

> In order to use any Thread based devices on a Matter controller you need to have at least one Thread Border router device within range of the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use any Thread-based devices on a Matter controller, you need to have at least one Thread Border router device within range of the device.
```

More info about Thread and diagnosing Thread networks and Border routers, see the [Thread](/integrations/thread/) integration.

> <p class='note'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class='note'>
```

> A lot of devices that (will) hit the market will use Thread for the radio communication and Matter as control protocol but this is not guaranteed. There are for example also Thread based devices available that only support Apple HomeKit or some vendor specific communication protocol. There are also a few  cases where you need to apply for a (beta) firmware update on the device to enable Matter as communication protocol. Therefore, whenever you are looking for devices, do not assume Matter support when you see a Thread logo. Look for the *Matter* logo itself (on either Wi-Fi/Ethernet based devices or Thread) or any other confirmation by the manufacturer that the device supports Matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many devices that (will) hit the market will use Thread for radio communication and Matter as a control protocol, but this is not guaranteed. For example, Thread-based devices are available that only support Apple HomeKit or some vendor-specific communication protocol. There are also a few cases where you need to apply for a (beta) firmware update on the device to enable Matter as a communication protocol. Therefore, do not assume Matter support when you see a Thread logo when looking for devices. Please be sure to look for the *Matter* logo itself (on either Wi-Fi/Ethernet-based devices or Thread) or any other confirmation by the manufacturer that the device supports Matter.
```

> </p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</div>
```

> Matter goes hand-in-hand with (but is not the same as) [Thread](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(network_protocol)>), which is a low power Radio mesh networking techology. Much like Zigbee, but with the key difference that it is _IP-addressable_, making it the perfect companion transport for Matter.
> 
> Thread devices become directly addressable by Matter controllers (such as Home Assistant) thanks to the use of so-called Thread Border Routers, which are in fact just devices that are both within your network and have a Thread chip builtin and thus act as a "router" between the Thread radio signal and your local network. These border routers (you will probably end up having multiple of them in your house) make sure that your Thread-based devices are reachable on your regular network and thus can be controlled with Matter. Examples of Thread Borders routers are the Apple TV 4K, HomePod (gen 2 or Mini), and the Google Nest Hub V2, so devices that you may already own. Besides that, all kind of other border routers are available, built-in to hardware appliances or software solutions based on OpenThread Border Router, such as the add-on we provide to use with the built-in Zigbee/Thread chip of the [Home Assistant Yellow](/yellow/) or the [Home Assistant SkyConnect](/skyconnect/) dongle.
> 
> To use any Thread-based devices on a Matter controller, you need to have at least one Thread Border router device within range of the device.
> More info about Thread and diagnosing Thread networks and Border routers, see the [Thread](/integrations/thread/) integration.

Reviewer 2: Some of these things duplicate what is written in the Thread integration, or should be part of the Thread integration. I'd go shorter here, and link to the Thread integration instead.

```suggestion
Matter goes hand-in-hand with (but is not the same as) {% term Thread %}. Thread is is a low power Radio mesh networking technology much like Zigbee. Unlike Zigbee, Thread is only a communication protocol that is _IP-addressable_. This makes it the perfect companion transport for Matter.

To use Thread based Matter devices you'll need a Thread border router such as Apple TV 4K, HomePod (gen 2 or Mini), the Google Nest Hub (2nd Gen) or Home Assistant add-ons based on the OpenThread Border Router.

Read more about Thread in the [Thread integration documentation](/integrations/thread/).
```

Author: Yes, that is on purpose because there's a lot of mixup/confusion hence the somewhat duplicated text. People use Thread as transport for Matter, they;re not installing Thread itself, hence I think the info should be here (for now).

Maybe we can remove it later when the dust settles. Can we perhaps copy some of the text to the Thread integration ?

Reviewer 3: I am not against a bit of redundancy in the documentation, as a user it is always burdensome to visit several documentation pages to do one thing.

Also, should we replace all the occurrences of the word `Thread` by `{% term Thread %}`  ? (e.g. line 51, 53, 55 and 56)

Reviewer: Agree, a duplicate is fine in this case. The subject is just to difficult at this point for people to grasp.

@Vinalti The use of the term plugin should be used sparingly. We don't want to link every word or occurrence.

Author: going to leave it as-is for now.

## Bluetooth

> Most (if not all) Matter compliant devices will also have a Bluetooth chip onboard, this is to ease commissioning (a somewhat technical term for adding a device to your controller). Bluetooth will not be used for controlling a device but only for pairing it after unboxing or factory reset. The Home Assistant controller uses the Home Assistant Companion app to do commissioning so you can bring your phone close to the device you want to commission. Your network credentials will then be sent by the controller to your device over Bluetooth in the commissioning process. If that succeeded, the device will furthermore communicate over its native interface, meaning WiFi, Ethernet or Thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most (if not all) Matter-compliant devices will also have a Bluetooth chip onboard, this is to ease commissioning (a somewhat technical term for adding a device to your controller). Bluetooth will not be used to control a device but only to pair it after unboxing or factory resetting. The Home Assistant controller uses the Home Assistant Companion app to do commissioning, so you can bring your phone close to the device you want to commission. The controller will then send your network credentials to your device over Bluetooth in the commissioning process. If that succeeds, the device will communicate over its native interface, meaning Wi-Fi, Ethernet, or Thread.
```

> <p class='note'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class='note'>
```

> Although your Home Assistant server might have a Bluetooth adapter on board that the controller can use for commissioning of devices, we choose not to utilize that adapter. Mainly to prevent issues with the built-in Bluetooth integration but also because it makes more sense to bring your mobile devices close to the Matter device you'd like to commission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although your Home Assistant server might have a Bluetooth adapter on board that the controller can use to commission devices, we choose not to utilize that adapter. Mainly to prevent issues with the built-in Bluetooth integration but also because it makes more sense to bring your mobile devices close to the Matter device you'd like to commission.
```

> </p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</div>
```

## Multi fabric: join to multiple controllers

> One of the great features of Matter is the so called _Multi Fabric_ feature: you can join the same device to multiple controllers. For example: add it to Google Home, Apple Home, and Home Assistant all at the same time. The standard describes that each device should be able to at least support 5 difference fabrics at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the great features of Matter is the so-called _Multi Fabric_ feature: you can join the same device to multiple controllers. For example, simultaneously add it to Google Home, Apple Home, and Home Assistant. The standard describes that each device should be able to at least support 5 different fabrics simultaneously.
```

> For devices where Home Assistant provides a native integration (with local API), Matter may not be the best option. Matter, being a universal standard, might not have the nitty-gritty features that come with a product specific protocol. A good example is Philips Hue: the communication over Matter only provides the basic controls over lights, the official integration brings all Hue unique features like (dynamic) scenes, entertainment mode, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For devices where Home Assistant provides a native integration (with local API), Matter may not be the best option. Matter, being a universal standard, might not have the nitty-gritty features that come with a product-specific protocol. A good example is Philips Hue: the communication over Matter only provides the basic controls over lights, while the official [Hue integration](/integrations/hue) brings all Hue unique features like (dynamic) scenes, entertainment mode, etc.
```

![image](/images/integrations/matter/matter_thread_infographic.webp)

Image taken from [this excellent article by The Verge](https://www.theverge.com/23165855/thread-smart-home-protocol-matter-apple-google-interview) about Matter that shows the landcape of Matter, Thread, Border routers and bridges in a nice visualized way.

{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

> For communicating with Matter devices, the Home Assistant integration runs its own "Matter controller" in a separate process which will be launched as add-on. This add-on runs the actual controller software and provides the connection between your Matter network (called Fabric in technical terms) and Home Assistant. The Home Assistant Matter integration connects to this server via a websocket connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For communicating with Matter devices, the Home Assistant integration runs its own "Matter controller" in a separate process which will be launched as an add-on. This add-on runs the controller software and connects your Matter network (called Fabric in technical terms) and Home Assistant. The Home Assistant Matter integration connects to this server via a WebSocket connection.
```

> The only supported configuration (for now) for the Matter integration is by running the officially provided Home Assistant Matter add-on. Running the [Matter server](https://github.com/home-assistant-libs/python-matter-server) by any other means is at your own risk and currently not officially supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only supported configuration (for now) for the Matter integration is by running the officially provided Home Assistant Matter add-on. Running the [Matter server](https://github.com/home-assistant-libs/python-matter-server) by any other means is at your own risk and is currently not officially supported.
```

## Current state of the integration

> While the support for Matter is evolving, we will regularly update the Matter integration with new features or device support. Because it might be hard to track what's supported and what's not, we list the current state here and try to update this information on a regular basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the support for Matter is evolving, we will regularly update the Matter integration with new features or device support. Because it might be hard to track what's supported and what's not, we list the current state here and try to update this information regularly.
```

> Supported platforms (device types)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supported platforms (device types):
```

- Binary sensor: We have so far tested door/window sensors and motion sensors, but others will probably work too.
- Climate: Support for thermostat devices is in development now.

> - Cover: Basic cover control has been implemented, but not all devices are supported yet.

Author: ```suggestion
- Cover: Has been implemented, but support for a tilt feature is still missing.
```

> - Cover: Basic cover control has been implemented but not all devices are supported yet.

Author: ```suggestion
- Cover: Cover control has been implemented for cover devices with lift support only, tilt support is still missing.
```

> - Binary sensor: We have so far tested door/window sensors and motion sensors but others will probably work too.
> - Climate: Support for thermostat devices is in development now.
> - Cover: Basic cover control has been implemented but not all devices are supported yet.
> - Lights: All features (in the Matter specification) should be supported, including color control etc.
> - Locks: Basic lock control has been implemented but not all devices and features are supported yet.
> - Sensor: We have currently tested Illuminance and temperature sensors but others will probably work too.
> - Switch: Powerplugs should work (note: no support for energy metering yet in Matter).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Binary sensor: We have so far tested door/window sensors and motion sensors, but others will probably work too.
- Climate: Support for thermostat devices is in development now.
- Cover: Basic cover control has been implemented, but not all devices are supported yet.
- Lights: All features (in the Matter specification) should be supported, including color control, etc.
- Locks: Basic lock control has been implemented, but not all devices and features are supported yet.
- Sensor: We have tested Illuminance and temperature sensors, but others will probably work too.
- Switch: Powerplugs should work (note: no support for energy metering yet in Matter).
```

> Note that a single Matter device can exist of multiple platform. For example a Motion sensor which also has a temperature sensor and Illuminance sensor on board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that a single Matter device can exist on multiple platforms. For example, a Motion sensor also has a temperature sensor and an illuminance sensor on board.
```

> If you own a (bridged) Matter device and you are missing controls for this device, create an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io) and make sure to post your Integration diagnostics there. In some cases we can easily extend the existing platform support based on your diagnostics dump.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you own a (bridged) Matter device and you are missing controls for this device, create an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io) and make sure to post your Integration diagnostics there. In some cases, we can easily extend the existing platform support based on your diagnostics dump.
```

### Share a device from Google Home

This method will allow you to share a device that was added to Google Home to Home Assistant. The result is that the device can be controlled from both Google Home and Home Assistant at the same time.

1.  Open the device in Google Home and press the settings button (jog wheel) in the top right.
2.  Click **Linked Matter apps and services**.
3.  Press the button **Link apps and services** to link the device to Home Assistant.
4.  Choose Home Assistant from the list, you are redirected to the Home Assistant Companion app now. Press **Add device**.
5.  Your device will now be added to Home Assistant. When the process finishes, you're redirected to the device page in Home Assistant.

<lite-youtube videoid="-B4WWevd2JI" videotitle="Share Matter device from Google Home to Home Assistant"></lite-youtube>

<p class='note'>
At this time it is not yet possible to share a device from Home Assistant to another platform. This feature should be added after the Matter SDK 1.1 is released.
</p>

## Experiment with Matter using a ESP32 dev board

> You do not yet have any Matter compatible hardware but you do like to try it out or maybe create your own DIY Matter device ? We have [prepared a page for you](https://nabucasa.github.io/matter-example-apps/) where you can easily flash Matter firmware to a supported ESP32 development board. We actually recommend the M5 Stamp C3 device running the Lightning app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You do not yet have any Matter-compatible hardware but you do like to try it out or maybe create your own DIY Matter device? We have [prepared a page for you](https://nabucasa.github.io/matter-example-apps/) where you can easily flash Matter firmware to a supported ESP32 development board. We recommend the M5 Stamp C3 device running the Lightning app.
```

NOTE for Android users: You need to follow the instructions at the bottom of the page to add the test device to the Google developer console, otherwise commissioning will fail. iOS users will not have this issue but they will get a prompt during commissioning asking if you trust the development device.

> 1. Make sure you are using the Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge browser.
> 2. Open https://nabucasa.github.io/matter-example-apps/
> 3. Attach the ESP32 device using a USB cable.
> 4. Select the radio button next to the example you like to setup, in case of an M5 Stamp, click **Lightning app for M5STAMP C3**.
> 5. Select **Connect**.
> 6. In the popup dialog that appears, choose the correct serial device, in most cases this will be something like "cu-usbserial" or alike.
> 7. Click **Install Matter Lightning app example** and let it install the firmware on the device. This will take a few minutes.
> 8. Once the device is flashed with the Matter firmware, connect to the device again but this time choose **Logs & console**.
> 9. You are presented with a console interface where you see live logging of events. This is actually an interactive shell where you can type commands. For a list of all commands, type **matter help** and press enter.
> 10. To add the device, we need the QR code. In the console type in **matter onboardingcodes ble** and copy/paste the URL in your browser.
> 11. Use the QR code to add the device using one of the above instructions on your phone, e.g. using the Home Assistant Companion app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make sure you use Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge browser.
2. Open https://nabucasa.github.io/matter-example-apps/
3. Attach the ESP32 device using a USB cable.
4. Select the radio button next to the example you like to set up, in case of an M5 Stamp, click **Lightning app for M5STAMP C3**.
5. Select **Connect**.
6. In the popup dialog that appears, choose the correct serial device. This will usually be something like "cu-usbserial" or alike.
7. Click **Install Matter Lightning app example** and let it install the firmware on the device. This will take a few minutes.
8. Once the device is flashed with the Matter firmware, connect to the device again but this time choose **Logs & console**.
9. You are presented with a console interface where you see live logging of events. This is an interactive shell where you can type commands. For a list of all commands, type **matter help** and press enter.
10. To add the device, we need the QR code. In the console, type in `matter onboardingcodes ble` and copy/paste the URL into your browser.
11. Use the QR code to add the device using one of the above instructions on your phone, e.g. using the Home Assistant Companion app.
```

## Known working devices

> Because availability of actual Matter devices (and their documentation) is sparse, we provide a list of all known working devices that are tested by the Home Assistant Matter developers and/or the community to help you find the device you need. Note: The list below is ordered alphabetically and some of the links contain affiliate links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the availability of actual Matter devices (and their documentation) is sparse, we provide a list of all known working devices that are tested by the Home Assistant Matter developers and/or the community to help you find the device you need. Note: The list below is ordered alphabetically, and some links contain affiliate links.
```

> Did you test a device that is not listed below ? It would be greatly appreciated if you share your experience either on the Matter discord channel or contribute a PR (or suggestion) to this documentation page so you can help out others, thanks in advance!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Did you test a device that is not listed below? It would be greatly appreciated if you share your experience either on the Matter discord channel or contribute a PR (or suggestion) to this documentation page so you can help others, thanks in advance!
```

### Aqara M2 Hub

- Bridges Aqara (Zigbee) devices connected to the hub to Matter.
- You need to enable Matter support/firmware in the Aqara app.
- You will need an Aqara (cloud) account and the app before you can use Matter.
- See [this Aqara landingpage](https://www.aqara.com/en/article-1583275073188196352.html) for more information, including what devices are bridged.

> - Thermostat devices (climate platform) are not supported yet (but currently in development).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Thermostat devices (climate platform) are not supported yet (but are currently in development).
```

> - Device events for example for the wall rockers and Cube are not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Device events, for example for the wall rockers and Cube, are not supported.
```

- If there is a Thread logo, you need to install the Matter firmware using the Eve app.
- No Matter logo and no Thread logo on the box? The device is not Matter compatible.
- The energy metering feature of the Eve plug will not work in Home Assistant (Apple only feature).
- Eve has just released official Matter support so ignore any documentation about the beta program.

[Eve Energy on Amazon](https://amzn.to/3YuO62P)
[Eve Door & Window on Amazon](https://amzn.to/3RIU6ml)
[Eve Motion on Amazon](https://amzn.to/3jDujiP)

### Nanoleaf Matter bulbs and Lightstrips

- Although the products work great once commissioned, multiple users have reported that commissioning them can be a bit difficult and requires some patience and multiple resets or optimizations to your home network.
- Check the [Nanoleaf Matter infopage](https://nanoleaf.me/en-EU/integration/matter/) for all supported products and instructions.

### Philips Hue (V2) Bridge

The Philips Hue V2 bridge supports Matter since a recent update (the beta program closed, it is now officially available). You can enable Matter support from the Hue app after which you can commission it to Home Assistant and other fabrics.

> - It does not make a lot of sense to bind the Hue bridge to Home Assistant because you will loose functionality over the default Hue integration in Home Assistant, such as button press events and (dynamic) scenes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Binding the Hue bridge to Home Assistant does not make sense because you will lose functionality over the default Hue integration in Home Assistant, such as button press events and (dynamic) scenes.
```

- You will need a Hue/Signify (cloud) account and the app before you can use Matter.
- Device events for example for dimmer remotes are not supported.
- Only basic control of lights is supported, no scenes, events, effects etc.

### TP-Link Tapo P125M (power plug)

- Look for the M addition in the model name, a device without the M (regular P125) is not Matter compliant.
- This device is available in the US only.

[TP-Link Tapo P125M on Amazon](https://amzn.to/3RILJah)

## Troubleshooting

### General recommendations

> - Using Thread based Matter devices in Home Assistant requires Home Assistant OS (version 10 and above) because of kernel patches to solve routing issues. Not using HAOS (and thus the official Matter add-on) is at your own risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Using Thread-based Matter devices in Home Assistant requires Home Assistant OS (version 10 and above) because of kernel patches to solve routing issues. Not using HAOS (and thus the official Matter add-on) is at your own risk.
```

> - To use Thread devices you will need a Thread Network with at least one Thread Border Router in your network nearby the Thread device(s). Apple users need for example the Apple TV 4K or the HomePod Mini while Google users need a Nest Hub V2. Use the Thread integration in Home Assistant to diagnose your Thread network(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To use Thread devices you will need a Thread Network with at least one Thread Border Router in your network nearby the Thread device(s). Apple users need for example the Apple TV 4K or the HomePod Mini, while Google users need a Nest Hub V2. Use the Thread integration in Home Assistant to diagnose your Thread network(s).
```

> - Start simple and work from there, keep your network easy and add for example an ESP32 test device. Does that work, move on to the next step or more devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Start simple and work from there, keep your network easy and add for example an ESP32 test device. Once that works, move on to the next step or more devices.
```

- Realize that you are an early adopter, both on the hardware side and on the software (controller) side so you may run into compatibility issues or features that are still missing. Report any issues you may find and help out others if you find a workaround or tested a device.

> - Make sure that IPv6 (multicast) traffic can travel freely from your network to the Home Assistant host. There is no requirement to have an IPv6 enabled internet connection or DHCPv6 server. However, IPv6 support has to be enabled (it's enabled by default on Home Assistant OS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make sure IPv6 (multicast) traffic travels freely from your network to the Home Assistant host. There is no requirement to have an IPv6-enabled internet connection or DHCPv6 server. However, IPv6 support has to be enabled (it's enabled by default on Home Assistant OS).
```

### I do not see the button "Commission using the Companion app"

This button will only be visible within the Home Assistant Companion App (so not in the browser) and your device meets all requirements for Matter support.

- For iOS, minimum version is iOS 16 (minimal 16.3 is preferred) and the most recent version of the HA companion app.
- For Android, minimum version is 8.1 and the most recent version of both the Google Home app and the (full) HA Companion app, downloaded from the app store.

### When I'm trying to commission using the Android app, I get an error stating "Matter is currently unavailable"

> See above, make sure your device meets all requirements to support Matter. Update Android to the latest version and the Google Home and Home Assistant Companion app. To quickly verify if your device meets all requirements to support Matter, on your Android device go to **Settings**>**Google**>**Devices & Sharing**. There should be an entry there for **Matter devices**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See above, make sure your device meets all requirements to support Matter. Update Android to the latest version and the Google Home and Home Assistant Companion app. To quickly verify if your device meets all requirements to support Matter, on your Android device, go to **Settings** > **Google** > **Devices & Sharing**. There should be an entry there for **Matter devices**.
```

> Some users have reported that an uninstall and reinstall of the Google Home app fixed this issue for them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some users have reported that uninstalling and reinstalling the Google Home app fixed this issue for them.
```

Also see this [extended troubleshooting guide](https://developers.home.google.com/matter/verify-services) from Google.

### Unable to commission devices, it keeps giving errors or stops working randomly

The Matter protocol relies on (local) IPv6 and mDNS (multicast traffic) which should be able to travel freely in your network. Matter devices that use Wi-Fi (including Thread Border routers) must be on the same LAN/VLAN as Home Assistant. Matter devices that only use Thread must be joined to Thread networks for which there is at least one border router connected to the Home Assistant LAN.

> If you experience any issues with the discovery of devices (e.g. initial commission keeps failing) or devices become unavailable randomly, investigate your network topology. For instance, a setting on your router or Wi-Fi access point to "optimize" multicast traffic can actually harm the (discovery) traffic from Matter devices. Keep this in mind when you experience issues trying to add or control Matter devices. Protocols like Matter are designed for regular residential network setups and do not play nice with enterprise networking solutions like VLAN's, Multicast filtering, and IGMP snooping. To avoid issues, try to keep your network as simple and flat as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Investigate your network topology if you experience any issues with discovering devices (like the initial commission keeps failing) or if devices become unavailable randomly. For instance, a setting on your router or Wi-Fi access point to "optimize" multicast traffic can harm the (discovery) traffic from Matter devices. Keep this in mind when you experience issues trying to add or control Matter devices. Protocols like Matter are designed for regular residential network setups and do not play nicely with enterprise networking solutions like VLANs, Multicast filtering, and IGMP snooping. Try to keep your network as simple and flat as possible to avoid issues.
```

The Matter integration allows you to control Matter devices on your local WiFi or Thread network.

<p class='note'>
Both the Matter standard itself and its implementation within Home Assistant are in a early stage, you may run into compatibility and/or early adopter problems, hence our mark of the integration as BETA.
</p>

# What is Matter ?

> Matter is [the new standard for home automation](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matter_(standard)>) which has been released recently. It is in the process of being adopted by the tech industry. Matter is a local protocol, device control is done without the need of any cloud. You can use a Matter compatible device with Home Assistant without (the technical) need to connect to a vendor specific cloud.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Matter is [the new standard for home automation](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matter_(standard)>) which has been released recently. It is in the process of being adopted by the tech industry. Matter is a local protocol. Device control is done without the need of any cloud. From a technical perspective, you can use a Matter compatible device with Home Assistant without having to connect to a vendor specific cloud. However, some vendors may require you to set up an account before you can enable Matter.
```

> Unlike radio based protocols we're already familiar with in the IoT landscape, like Zigbee and Z-Wave, Matter makes use of standard IP-based communication so it runs on top of the existing network infrastructure (meaning: it uses your existing WiFi and ethernet routers) and Thread.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unlike the radio based protocols we're already familiar with in the IoT landscape, like Zigbee and Z-Wave, Matter makes use of standard IP-based communication. Matter is not a radio protocol, but a control protocol that runs on top of the existing network infrastructure, using your existing Wi-Fi/Ethernet routers and Thread.
```

> Home Assistant is a so called Controller, it can **control** Matter based devices. Other examples of Matter controllers are the Google Nest speakers, Apple Homepods and a SmartThings Station.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Home Assistant is a so called *controller*, it can control Matter based devices. Other examples of Matter controllers are the Google Nest speakers, Apple HomePods, and a SmartThings Station.
```
We are using bold to markup UI elements, I would use it sparingly outside of that.

## Bridge devices

> One of the great things about Matter is that you can have both WiFi and Thread based devices on the same controller.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One of the great things about Matter is that you can have both Wi-Fi and Thread based devices on the same controller.
```

> Next to actual devices (e.g. actors or sensors) you will also see Bridges (most likely connected over ethernet but can be WiFi too) wich (as the name implies) bridges multiple devices into Matter. A great example of this is the Philips Hue V2 bridge which is a Zigbee hub but also a Matter bridge, so it exposes all Zigbee devices already connected to the bridge as Matter devices on the network. Also Aqara, SwitchBot and IKEA have launched such Hub devices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next to actual devices (e.g. actors or sensors) you will also see Bridges (most likely connected over ethernet or WiFi) which bridges multiple devices into Matter. A great example of this is the Philips Hue V2 bridge which is a Zigbee hub but also a Matter bridge, so it exposes all Zigbee devices already connected to the bridge as Matter devices on the network. Also Aqara, SwitchBot and IKEA have launched such Hub devices.
```

> Next to actual devices (e.g. actors or sensors) you will also see Bridges (most likely connected over ethernet but can be WiFi too) which (as the name implies) bridges multiple devices into Matter. A great example of this is the Philips Hue V2 bridge which is a Zigbee hub but also a Matter bridge, so it exposes all Zigbee devices already connected to the bridge as Matter devices on the network. Also Aqara, SwitchBot and IKEA have launched such Hub devices.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Next to actual devices (e.g. actors or sensors), you will also see bridges. The bridge itself is connected to the network over Ethernet or Wi-Fi and bridges multiple devices into a Matter network. A great example of this is the Philips Hue V2 bridge which is a Zigbee hub but also a Matter bridge. This bridge exposes all Zigbee devices that are already connected to the bridge as Matter devices on the network. Also Aqara, SwitchBot, and IKEA have launched such Hub devices.
```

<p class='note'>
Home Assistant, as a Matter controller, only supports **control** of Matter devices. Home Assistant is not a bridge itself and it cannot turn existing devices within Home Assistant into Matter compatible devices.
</p>

## Thread

Matter goes hand-in-hand with (but is not the same as) [Thread](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(network_protocol)>), which is a low power Radio mesh networking techology. Much like Zigbee, but with the key difference that it is _IP-addresseable_, making it the perfect companion transport for Matter.

> Thread devices become directly addresseable by Matter controllers (such as Home Assistant) thanks to the use of so called Thread Border Routers, which are in fact just devices that are both within your network and have a Thread chip builtin and thus act as a "router"  between the Thread radio signal and your local network. These border routers (you will probably end up having multiple of them in your house) make sure that your Thread based devices are reachable on your regular network and thus can be controlled with Matter. Examples of Thread Borders routers are the Apple TV 4K, HomePod (gen 2 or Mini) and the Google Nest Hub V2, so devices that you may already own. Besides that, all kind of other border routers are available, built-in to hardware applicances or software solutions based on OpenThread Border Router, such as the addon we provide to use with the built-in Zigbee/Thread chip of the [Home Assistant Yellow](/yellow/) or the [Home Assistant SkyConnect](/skyconnect/) dongle.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thread devices become directly addresseable by Matter controllers (such as Home Assistant) thanks to the use of so called Thread Border Routers, which are in fact just devices that are both within your network and have a Thread chip builtin and thus act as a "router"  between the Thread radio signal and your local network. These border routers (you will probably end up having multiple of them in your house) make sure that your Thread based devices are reachable on your regular network and thus can be controlled with Matter. Examples of Thread Borders routers are the Apple TV 4K, HomePod (gen 2 or Mini) and the Google Nest Hub V2, so devices that you may already own. Besides that, all kind of other border routers are available, built-in to hardware applicances or software solutions based on OpenThread Border Router, such as the add-on we provide to use with the built-in Zigbee/Thread chip of the [Home Assistant Yellow](/yellow/) or the [Home Assistant SkyConnect](/skyconnect/) dongle.
```

> Thread devices become directly addresseable by Matter controllers (such as Home Assistant) thanks to the use of so called Thread Border Routers, which are in fact just devices that are both within your network and have a Thread chip builtin and thus act as a "router"  between the Thread radio signal and your local network. These border routers (you will probably end up having multiple of them in your house) make sure that your Thread based devices are reachable on your regular network and thus can be controlled with Matter. Examples of Thread Borders routers are the Apple TV 4K, HomePod (gen 2 or Mini) and the Google Nest Hub V2, so devices that you may already own. Besides that, all kind of other border routers are available, built-in to hardware applicances or software solutions based on OpenThread Border Router, such as the addon we provide to use with the built-in Zigbee/Thread chip of the [Home Assistant Yellow](/yellow/) or the [Home Assistant SkyConnect](/skyconnect/) dongle.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Thread devices become directly addressable by Matter controllers (such as Home Assistant) thanks to the use of so called Thread Border Routers, which are in fact just devices that are both within your network and have a Thread chip builtin and thus act as a "router"  between the Thread radio signal and your local network. These border routers (you will probably end up having multiple of them in your house) make sure that your Thread based devices are reachable on your regular network and thus can be controlled with Matter. Examples of Thread Borders routers are the Apple TV 4K, HomePod (gen 2 or Mini) and the Google Nest Hub V2, so devices that you may already own. Besides that, all kind of other border routers are available, built-in to hardware applicances or software solutions based on OpenThread Border Router, such as the addon we provide to use with the built-in Zigbee/Thread chip of the [Home Assistant Yellow](/yellow/) or the [Home Assistant SkyConnect](/skyconnect/) dongle.
```

In order to use any Thread based devices on a Matter controller you need to have at least one Thread Border router device within range of the device.
More info about Thread and diagnosing Thread networks and Border routers, see the [Thread](/integrations/thread/) integration.

<p class='note'>
A lot of devices that (will) hit the market will use Thread for the radio communication and Matter as control protocol but this is not guaranteed. There are for example also Thread based devices available that only support Apple Homekit or some vendor specific communication protocol. There are also a few  cases where you meed to apply for a (beta) firmware update on the device to enable Matter as communication protocol. Therefore it is adviced that whenever you are looking for devices, do not assume Matter support when you see a Thread logo but look for the *Matter logo itself* (on either Wifi/ethernet based devices or Thread) or any other confirmation by the manufacturer that the device supports Matter.
</p>

## Bluetooth

> Most (if not all) Matter compliant devices will also have a Bluetooth chip onboard, this is to ease comissioning (a somewhat technical term for adding a device to your controller). Bluetooth will not be used for controlling a device but only for pairing it after unboxing or factory reset. The Home Assistant controller uses the Home Assistant Companion app to do comissioning so you can bring your phone close to the device you want to commission. Your network credentials will then be sent by the controller to your device over bluetooth in the commissioning process. If that succeeded, the device will furthermore communicate over its native interface, meaning WiFi, ethernet or Thread.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most (if not all) Matter compliant devices will also have a Bluetooth chip onboard, this is to ease commissioning (a somewhat technical term for adding a device to your controller). Bluetooth will not be used for controlling a device but only for pairing it after unboxing or factory reset. The Home Assistant controller uses the Home Assistant Companion app to do commissioning so you can bring your phone close to the device you want to commission. Your network credentials will then be sent by the controller to your device over Bluetooth in the commissioning process. If that succeeded, the device will furthermore communicate over its native interface, meaning WiFi, Ethernet or Thread.
```

<p class='note'>

> Although your Home Assistant server might have a bluetooth adapter on board so the controller can use that for comissioning of devices, we choose not to utilize that adapter, mainly to prevent issues with the built-in Bluetooth integration but also because it makes more sense to just bring your mobile devices close to the Matter device you'd like to commission.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Although your Home Assistant server might have a Bluetooth adapter on board that the controller can use for commissioning of devices, we choose not to utilize that adapter. Mainly to prevent issues with the built-in Bluetooth integration but also because it makes more sense to bring your mobile devices close to the Matter device you'd like to commission.
```

</p>

## Multi fabric: join to multiple controllers

> One of the great features of Matter is the so called _Multi Fabric_ feature: you can join the same device to multiple controllers. For example: add it to Google Home, Apple Home, and Home Assistant all at the same time. The standard describes that each device should be able to (minimal) support 5 difference fabrics at the same time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One of the great features of Matter is the so called _Multi Fabric_ feature: you can join the same device to multiple controllers. For example: add it to Google Home, Apple Home, and Home Assistant all at the same time. The standard describes that each device should be able to at least support 5 difference fabrics at the same time.
```

For devices where Home Assistant provides a native integration (with local API), Matter may not be the best option. Matter, being a universal standard, might not have the nitty-gritty features that come with a product specific protocol. A good example is Philips Hue: the communication over Matter only provides the basic controls over lights, the official integration brings all Hue unique features like (dynamic) scenes, entertainment mode, etc.

![image](/images/integrations/matter/matter_thread_infographic.webp)

Image taken from [this excellent article by The Verge](https://www.theverge.com/23165855/thread-smart-home-protocol-matter-apple-google-interview) about Matter that shows the landcape of Matter, Thread, Border routers and bridges in a nice visualized way.

<p class='note'>
The Matter protocol relies on (local) IPv6 and mDNS (multicast traffic) which should be able to travel freely in your network. Matter devices (and any Thread Border routers) must be on the same LAN/VLAN as Home Assistant. Implementations like mDNS reflectors usually do more harm than good.
</p>

{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

> For communicating with Matter devices, the Home Assistant integration runs its own "Matter controller" in a seperate process which will be launched as add-on. This add-on runs the actual controller software and provides the connection between your Matter network (called Fabric in technical terms) and Home Assistant. The Home Assistant Matter integration connects to this server via a websocket connection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For communicating with Matter devices, the Home Assistant integration runs its own "Matter controller" in a separate process which will be launched as add-on. This add-on runs the actual controller software and provides the connection between your Matter network (called Fabric in technical terms) and Home Assistant. The Home Assistant Matter integration connects to this server via a websocket connection.
```

The only supported configuration (for now) for the Matter integration is by running the officially provided Home Assistant Matter add-on. Running the [Matter server](https://github.com/home-assistant-libs/python-matter-server) by any other means is at your own risk and currently not officially supported.

## Current state of the integration

> While the support for Matter is evolving, we will regularly update the Matter integration with new features or device support. Because it might be hard to track what's supported and what not, we list the current state here and try to update this information on a regular base.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the support for Matter is evolving, we will regularly update the Matter integration with new features or device support. Because it might be hard to track what's supported and what's not, we list the current state here and try to update this information on a regular basis.
```

Supported platforms (device types)

- Binary sensor: We have so far tested door/window sensors and motion sensors but others will probably work too.
- Climate: Support for thermostat devices is in development now.
- Cover: Basic cover control has been implemented but not all devices are supported yet.
- Lights: All features (in the Matter specification) should be supported, including color control etc.
- Locks: Basic lock control has been implemented but not all devices and features are supported yet.
- Sensor: We have currently tested Illuminance and temperature sensors but others will probably work too.
- Switch: Powerplugs should work (note: no support for energy metering yet in Matter).

Note that a single Matter device can exist of multiple platform. For example a Motion sensor which also has a temperature sensor and Illuminance sensor on board.

> Do you own a (bridged) Matter device and you are missing controls for this device, create an issue on Github and make sure to post your Integration diagnostics there. In some cases we can easily extend the existing platform support based on your diagnostics dump.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you own a (bridged) Matter device and you are missing controls for this device, create an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io) and make sure to post your Integration diagnostics there. In some cases we can easily extend the existing platform support based on your diagnostics dump.
```

## Adding Matter devices to Home Assistant

Each Matter network is called a fabric. Each home automation controller that controls Matter devices has its own "fabric". You can add devices directly to the fabric of your Home Assistant instance, or share them from another fabric (ie Google, Apple) to Home Assistant's fabric. We're going to explore all these options below.

### Add a device using the iOS Companion app

This will use the Bluetooth connection of your phone to add the device.

1. Open The Home Assistant app on your phone.
2. Go to Settings, Devices & Services.

> 3. On the Devices tab, press the `Add device` button.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. On the **Devices** tab, press the **Add device** button.
```

6. In the popup dialog that appears choose the correct serial device, in most cases this will be something like "cu-usbserial" or alike.
7. Click `Install Matter Lightning app example` and let it install the firmware on the device, this will take a few minutes.
8. Once the device is flashed with the Matter firmware, connect to the device again but this time choose `Logs & console`.
9. You are presented with a console interface where you see live logging of events. This is actually an interactive shell where you can type commands. For a list of all commands, type `matter help` and press enter.
10. To add the device, we need the QR code. In the console type in `matter onboardingcodes ble` and copy/paste the URL in your browser.
11. Use the QR code to add the device using one of the above instructions on your phone, e.g. using the Home Assistant Companion app.

## Known working devices

Because availability of actual Matter devices is sparse and proper HOWTO documentation even more, we provide a list of all known working devices that are tested by the Home Assistant Matter developers and/or the community. The list below is unordered and some of the links contain affiliate links.

> Did you test a device that is not listed below ? It would be greatly appreciated if you share your experience either on the Matter discord channel or contibute a PR (or suggestion) to this documentation page so you can help out others, thanks in advance!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Did you test a device that is not listed below ? It would be greatly appreciated if you share your experience either on the Matter discord channel or contribute a PR (or suggestion) to this documentation page so you can help out others, thanks in advance!
```

In order to use any Thread based devices on a Matter controller you need to have at least one Thread Border router device within range of the device.
More info about Thread and diagnosing Thread networks and Border routers, see the [Thread](/integrations/thread/) integration.

<p class='note'>

> A lot of devices that (will) hit the market will use Thread for the radio communication and Matter as control protocol but this is not guaranteed. There are for example also Thread based devices available that only support Apple Homekit or some vendor specific communication protocol. There are also a few  cases where you meed to apply for a (beta) firmware update on the device to enable Matter as communication protocol. Therefore it is adviced that whenever you are looking for devices, do not assume Matter support when you see a Thread logo but look for the *Matter logo itself* (on either Wifi/ethernet based devices or Thread) or any other confirmation by the manufacturer that the device supports Matter.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A lot of devices that (will) hit the market will use Thread for the radio communication and Matter as control protocol but this is not guaranteed. There are for example also Thread based devices available that only support Apple HomeKit or some vendor specific communication protocol. There are also a few  cases where you need to apply for a (beta) firmware update on the device to enable Matter as communication protocol. Therefore, whenever you are looking for devices, do not assume Matter support when you see a Thread logo. Look for the *Matter* logo itself (on either Wi-Fi/Ethernet based devices or Thread) or any other confirmation by the manufacturer that the device supports Matter.
```

- Switch: Powerplugs should work (note: no support for energy metering yet in Matter).

Note that a single Matter device can exist of multiple platform. For example a Motion sensor which also has a temperature sensor and Illuminance sensor on board.

If you own a (bridged) Matter device and you are missing controls for this device, create an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io) and make sure to post your Integration diagnostics there. In some cases we can easily extend the existing platform support based on your diagnostics dump.

## Adding Matter devices to Home Assistant

Each Matter network is called a fabric. Each home automation controller that controls Matter devices has its own "fabric". You can add devices directly to the fabric of your Home Assistant instance, or share them from another fabric (ie Google, Apple) to Home Assistant's fabric. We're going to explore all these options below.

### Add a device using the iOS Companion app

This will use the Bluetooth connection of your phone to add the device.

1. Open The Home Assistant app on your phone.

> 2. Go to Settings, Devices & Services.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Go to {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & Services**" %}.
```
We have My links :heart:

3. On the **Devices** tab, press the **Add device** button.

> 4. Choose `Add Matter device` as the top of the list.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Choose **Add Matter device** at the top of the list.
```

> 5. Scan the QR-code of the Matter device with your phone camera or press `More options...` to manually enter the Commission code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
5. Scan the QR-code of the Matter device with your phone camera or press **More options...** to manually enter the Commission code.
```

> 6. Press the `Add to Home Assistant` button which will start the commissioning process which may take up to a few minutes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. Select the **Add to Home Assistant** button which will start the commissioning process which may take up to a few minutes.
```

> 7. If you're adding a test board or beta device you might get a prompt about an Uncertified Accessory". In this dialog press `Add Anyway`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
7. If you're adding a test board or beta device, you might get a prompt about a "Uncertified Accessory". In this dialog, select **Add Anyway**.
```

> 8. Once prompted you can enter a custom Accessory Name, this is just an internal reference and not visible in Home Assistant so you can type whatever you like here.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
8. Once prompted, you can enter a custom **Accessory Name**, this is just an internal reference and not visible in Home Assistant. You can type whatever you like here.
```

> 9. Once the process is complete and you pressed the `Done` button, you are redirected to the Device within Home Assistant and its ready for use.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
9. Once the process is complete and you pressed the **Done** button, you are redirected to the device within Home Assistant. It is ready for use.
```

<lite-youtube videoid="8y79Kq3QfCQ" videotitle="Add Matter device via iOS app in Home Assistant"></lite-youtube>

### Add a device using the Android Companion app

This will use the Bluetooth connection of your phone to add the device.

1. Open The Home Assistant app on your phone.

> 2. Go to Settings, Devices & Services.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Go to {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & Services**" %}.
```

> 3. On the Devices tab, press the `Add device` button.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. On the **Devices** tab, press the **Add device** button.
```

> 4. Choose `Add Matter device` as the top of the list.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Choose **Add Matter device** as the top of the list.
```

> 5. Scan the QR-code of the Matter device with your phones camera or press the `Setup without QR-code` button to manually enter the Commission code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
5. Scan the QR-code of the Matter device with your phones camera or select the **Setup without QR-code** button to manually enter the commission code.
```

6. The process will start adding the device which takes up to a few minutes.
7. If you're adding a test board (e.g. ESP32 running the example apps) and commissioning fails, you might need to take some actions in the Google Developer console, have a look at any instructions for your test device.

> 8. Once the process is complete and you pressed the `Done` button, you are redirected to the Device within Home Assistant and its ready for use.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
8. Once the process is complete and you pressed the **Done** button, you are redirected to the device within Home Assistant. It is ready for use.
```

<lite-youtube videoid="Fk0n0r0eKcE" videotitle="Add Matter device via Android app in Home Assistant"></lite-youtube>

### Share a device from Apple Home

This method will allow you to select a Matter device from Apple Home and share it to Home Assistant. The result is that the device can be controlled from both Apple Home and Home Assistant at the same time.

> 1.  Find your device in Apple Home and press the jogwheel to edit it. In the page with detailed descriptions and settings for the device, scroll all the way down and press the button `Turn On Pairing Mode`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1.  Find your device in Apple Home and press the jogwheel to edit it. In the page with detailed descriptions and settings for the device, scroll all the way down and press the button **Turn On Pairing Mode**.
```

2.  You are now given a Setup code, copy this to the clipboard.
3.  Follow the [Add a device using the iOS Companion app](#add-a-device-using-the-ios-companion-app) directions above to add the device to Home Assistant where you paste the code you just received from Apple Home.

<lite-youtube videoid="nyGyZv90jnQ" videotitle="Share Matter device from Apple Home to Home Assistant"></lite-youtube>

### Share a device from Google Home

This method will allow you to share a device that was added to Google Home to Home Assistant. The result is that the device can be controlled from both Google Home and Home Assistant at the same time.

1.  Open the device in Google Home and press the settings button (jog wheel) in the top right.

> 2.  Click `Linked Matter apps and services`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2.  Click **Linked Matter apps and services**.
```

> 3.  Press the button `Link apps and services` to link the device to Home Assistant.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3.  Press the button **Link apps and services** to link the device to Home Assistant.
```

> 4.  Choose Home Assistant from the list, you are redirected to the Home Assistant Companion app now. Press `Add device`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4.  Choose Home Assistant from the list, you are redirected to the Home Assistant Companion app now. Press **Add device**.
```

<lite-youtube videoid="-B4WWevd2JI" videotitle="Share Matter device from Google Home to Home Assistant"></lite-youtube>

<p class='note'>
At this time it is not yet possible to share a device from Home Assistant to another platform. This feature should be added after the Matter SDK 1.1 is released.
</p>

## Experiment with Matter using a ESP32 dev board

You do not yet have any Matter compatible hardware but you do like to try it out or maybe create your own DIY Matter device ? We have [prepared a page for you](https://nabucasa.github.io/matter-example-apps/) where you can easily flash Matter firmware to a supported ESP32 development board. We actually recommend the M5 Stamp C3 device running the Lightning app.

NOTE for Android users: You need to follow the instructions at the bottom of the page to add the test device to the Google developer console, otherwise commissioning will fail. iOS users will not have this issue but they will get a prompt during commissioning asking if you trust the development device.

1. Make sure you are using the Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge browser.
2. Open https://nabucasa.github.io/matter-example-apps/

> 3. Attach the ESP32 device using an USB cable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Attach the ESP32 device using a USB cable.
```

> 4. Click the radiobutton next to the example you like to setup, in case of an M5 Stamp, click `Lightning app for M5STAMP C3`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Select the radio button next to the example you like to setup, in case of an M5 Stamp, click **Lightning app for M5STAMP C3**.
```

> 5. Press `Connect`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
5. Select **Connect**.
```

> 6. In the popup dialog that appears choose the correct serial device, in most cases this will be something like "cu-usbserial" or alike.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. In the popup dialog that appears, choose the correct serial device, in most cases this will be something like "cu-usbserial" or alike.
```

> 7. Click `Install Matter Lightning app example` and let it install the firmware on the device, this will take a few minutes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
7. Click **Install Matter Lightning app example** and let it install the firmware on the device. This will take a few minutes.
```

> 8. Once the device is flashed with the Matter firmware, connect to the device again but this time choose `Logs & console`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
8. Once the device is flashed with the Matter firmware, connect to the device again but this time choose **Logs & console**.
```

> 9. You are presented with a console interface where you see live logging of events. This is actually an interactive shell where you can type commands. For a list of all commands, type `matter help` and press enter.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
9. You are presented with a console interface where you see live logging of events. This is actually an interactive shell where you can type commands. For a list of all commands, type **matter help** and press enter.
```

> 10. To add the device, we need the QR code. In the console type in `matter onboardingcodes ble` and copy/paste the URL in your browser.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
10. To add the device, we need the QR code. In the console type in **matter onboardingcodes ble** and copy/paste the URL in your browser.
```
Is this correct? onboardingcodes ble ?

Author: yes it is

- For iOS, minimum version is iOS 16 (minimal 16.3 is preferred) and the most recent version of the HA companion app.
- For Android, minimum version is 8.1 and the most recent version of both the Google Home app and the (full) HA Companion app, downloaded from the app store.

### When I'm trying to commission using the Android app, I get an error stating "Matter is currently unavailable"

See above, make sure your device meets all requirements to support Matter. Update Android to the latest version and the Google Home and Home Assistant Companion app. To quickly verify if your device meets all requirements to support Matter, on your Android device go to **Settings**>**Google**>**Devices & Sharing**. There should be an entry there for **Matter devices**.

Some users have reported that an uninstall and reinstall of the Google Home app fixed this issue for them.
Also see this [extended troubleshooting guide](https://developers.home.google.com/matter/verify-services) from Google.

### Unable to commission devices, it keeps giving errors or stops working randomly

> The Matter protocol relies on (local) IPv6 and mDNS (multicast traffic) which should be able to travel freely in your network. Matter devices that use WiFi (including Thread Border routers) must be on the same LAN/VLAN as Home Assistant. Matter devices that only use Thread must be joined to Thread networks for which there is at least one border router connected to the Home Assistant LAN.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Matter protocol relies on (local) IPv6 and mDNS (multicast traffic) which should be able to travel freely in your network. Matter devices that use Wi-Fi (including Thread Border routers) must be on the same LAN/VLAN as Home Assistant. Matter devices that only use Thread must be joined to Thread networks for which there is at least one border router connected to the Home Assistant LAN.
```

> The Matter protocol relies on (local) IPv6 and mDNS (multicast traffic) which should be able to travel freely in your network. Matter devices that use WiFi (including Thread Border routers) must be on the same LAN/VLAN as Home Assistant. Matter devices that only use Thread must be joined to Thread networks for which there is at least one border router connected to the Home Assistant LAN.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Matter protocol relies on (local) IPv6 and mDNS (multicast traffic) which should be able to travel freely in your network. Matter devices that use Wi-Fi (including Thread Border routers) must be on the same LAN/VLAN as Home Assistant. Matter devices that only use Thread must be joined to Thread networks for which there is at least one border router connected to the Home Assistant LAN.
```

> If you experience any issues with the discovery of devices (e.g. initial commission keeps failing) or devices become unavailable randomly, investigate your network topology. For instance a setting on your router or Wi-Fi access point to "optimize" multicast traffic can actually harm the (discovery) traffic from Matter devices. Keep this in mind when you experience issues trying to add or control Matter devices. Protocols like Matter are designed for regular residential network setups and do not play nice with enterprise networking solutions like VLAN's, Multicast filtering, and IGMP snooping. To avoid issues, try to keep your network as simple and flat as possible.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you experience any issues with the discovery of devices (e.g. initial commission keeps failing) or devices become unavailable randomly, investigate your network topology. For instance, a setting on your router or Wi-Fi access point to "optimize" multicast traffic can actually harm the (discovery) traffic from Matter devices. Keep this in mind when you experience issues trying to add or control Matter devices. Protocols like Matter are designed for regular residential network setups and do not play nice with enterprise networking solutions like VLAN's, Multicast filtering, and IGMP snooping. To avoid issues, try to keep your network as simple and flat as possible.
```

> The Matter integration allows you to control Matter devices on your local WiFi or Thread network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Matter integration allows you to control Matter devices on your local WiFi or {% term thread %} network.
```
Frenck made these terminology tool tips. I think they are awesome.

## Adding Matter devices to Home Assistant

Each Matter network is called a fabric. Each home automation controller that controls Matter devices has its own "fabric". You can add devices directly to the fabric of your Home Assistant instance, or share them from another fabric (ie Google, Apple) to Home Assistant's fabric. We're going to explore all these options below.

### Add a device using the iOS Companion app

This will use the Bluetooth connection of your phone to add the device.

1. Open The Home Assistant app on your phone.
2. Go to {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & Services**" %}.
3. On the **Devices** tab, press the **Add device** button.
4. Choose **Add Matter device** at the top of the list.
5. Scan the QR-code of the Matter device with your phone camera or press **More options...** to manually enter the Commission code.
6. Select the **Add to Home Assistant** button which will start the commissioning process which may take up to a few minutes.

> 7. If you're adding a test board or beta device, you might get a prompt about a "Uncertified Accessory". In this dialog, select **Add Anyway**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. If you're adding a test board or beta device, you might get a prompt about an "Uncertified Accessory". In this dialog, select **Add Anyway**.
```

- This device is available in the US only.

[TP-Link Tapo P125M on Amazon](https://amzn.to/3RILJah)

## Troubleshooting

### General recommendations

- Using Thread based Matter devices in Home Assistant requires Home Assistant OS (version 10 and above) because of kernel patches to solve routing issues. Not using HAOS (and thus the official Matter add-on) is at your own risk.

- To use Thread devices you will need a Thread Network with at least one Thread Border Router in your network nearby the Thread device(s). Apple users need for example the Apple TV 4K or the HomePod Mini while Google users need a Nest Hub V2. Use the Thread integration in Home Assistant to diagnose your Thread network(s).

- Start simple and work from there, keep your network easy and add for example an ESP32 test device. Does that work, move on to the next step or more devices.

- Realize that you are an early adopter, both on the hardware side and on the software (controller) side so you may run into compatibility issues or features that are still missing. Report any issues you may find and help out others if you find a workaround or tested a device.

> - Make sure that IPv6 (multicast) traffic can travel freely from your network to the Home Assistant host. There is no requirement to have an IPv6 enabled internet connection or DHCP server but at least do not disable the IPv6 interface on HAOS (it's enabled by default).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Make sure that IPv6 (multicast) traffic can travel freely from your network to the Home Assistant host. There is no requirement to have an IPv6 enabled internet connection or DHCPv6 server. However, IPv6 support has to be enabled (it's enabled by default on Home Assistant OS).
```

- You will need to create an Aqara (cloud) account and the app before you can use Matter.
- See [this page](https://www.aqara.com/en/article-1583275073188196352.html) for more information including what devices are bridged.
- Thermostat devices (climate platform) are not supported yet (but currently in development).
- Device events for example for the wall rockers and Cube are not supported.

### Eve Energy (power plug), Eve Door & Window (contact sensor), Eve Motion (motion sensor)

- If you see a Matter logo on the box, the device runs Matter already and you can add it to HA immediately.
- If there is a Thread logo, you need to install the Matter firmware using the Eve app.
- No Matter logo and no Thread logo on the box? The device is not Matter compatible.
- The energy metering feature of the Eve plug will not work in Home Assistant (Apple only feature).
- Eve has just released official Matter support so ignore any documentation about the beta program.

[Eve Energy on Amazon](https://amzn.to/3YuO62P)
[Eve Door & Window on Amazon](https://amzn.to/3RIU6ml)
[Eve Motion on Amazon](https://amzn.to/3jDujiP)

### Nanoleaf Matter bulbs and Lightstrips

> - Altough the products work great once commissioned, multiple users have reported that commissioning them can be a bit difficult and requires some patience and multiple resets or optimizations to your home network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Although the products work great once commissioned, multiple users have reported that commissioning them can be a bit difficult and requires some patience and multiple resets or optimizations to your home network.
```
